---
title: "Book Summary: Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided by Tests"
date: 2021-05-13
published: false
tags: ["Software Testing", "Test Driven Development"]
series: false
cover_image: ./images/philipp-katzenberger-LLmqyIxcXCE-unsplash.jpg
cover_image_credits: "<a href='https://unsplash.com/@fantasyflip'>Philipp Katzenberger</a>"
canonical_url: false
description: "I have finally gotten round to reading the famous GOOS book that has been around since 2009. Here is my summary."
---

I've recently been lucky enough to receive an [O'Reilly Learning membership](https://www.oreilly.com/online-learning/) from work (we're hiring btw 👀). Part of the perks of this, includes access to thousands of books for free. As someone who has always somehow found an excuse not to get through my list of software development related books to read, I decided that this must've been a sign that this needed to change.

As the title of this post suggests, Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided by Tests by Steve Freeman & Nat Pryce (also known in our community as "the GOOS book"), became my weapon of choice. I cannot quite remember who suggested this book to me, but it was on my list of books to read. At first glance being around 11 years old, it obviously may come across as slight outdated, but whilst this may be the case for some of the practical examples within the book written in Java using libraries such as JUnit & JMock, as we know in our industry languages, frameworks & libraries come & go but for a lot of things, the underlying concepts remain roughly the same.

The book is seen as a common sequel to Kent Beck's book on Test-Driven Development (Test-Driven Development by Example). This book has a seal of approval from Kent Beck himself, along with the likes of Robert Martin (Uncle Bob) & Michael Feathers. Whilst Beck's original book introduced TDD to the world, it did so at a relatively simple level using a money conversion example. It applied what is known as the Classicist approach to TDD. In the real world though, software is more complex than the money conversion example. We find ourselves with significantly more complex domains, designing classes with numerous dependencies which means we resort to techniques such as mocking or stubbing & we even sometimes we have to deal with legacy code that is highly coupled & difficult to refactor which requires complex data. This book looks at how to deal with these things. Overall, I think it's one of those books where you cannot completely soak it all in with one read through. It's one of those books that you'll always go back to, regardless of whatever tech stack you're working in.

Overall, the book was an enjoyable read. I already knew about concepts such as Acceptance Test-Driven Development, mocking using libraries such as NSubstitute or Moq & things like walking skeletons. However despite a slight disconnect between myself & the Java examples within the book (close enough to C# right?), I found that reading it did a great job in re-affirming my belief in many concepts that I have been taught by more senior developers to myself. In this post, I'm going to share my most important takeaways from the book.

## Developers are the FIRST stakeholder

Chances are that when we are triggered to write some code, it is in response to a User Story/Functional Requirement from a stakeholder of some sort. Developers can make the mistake of implementing it in whatever way they see fit at the time, writing code for the present with the sole aim to satisfy the stakeholder. However, the reason why this is a mistake is because there becomes so much focus on the output of the code that we write being right for the stakeholder, that we forget that it also has to be right for the development team that own that code.

Unless there is a necessity not to optimise code for readability (such as meeting a Non-Functional Requirement of some sort) & maintainability, then there is no excuse not to do so. Code is read far more than it is written. The same applies to refactoring or modifying existing code versus writing code from scratch.

There tends to be a direct correlation between team productivity and code readability. The book says "we value code that is easy to maintain over code that is easy to write".

Tests are not just about helping developers refactor existing code or trying to catch bugs. Tests should also be a living documentation of what the software system does, they should be seen as examples of how our software should be used. Tests should be named to describe what something does, including things such as the expected result.

Since a software system's tests should explain the features & requirements of that system, we should apply the same care towards ensuring our tests are as readable & descriptive as possible. Not just the actual implementation code. The book emphasises the importance of the Refactor stage of the Red, Green, Refactor TDD cycle also including the refactoring of tests we have written to improve readability.


## Listen to your tests

As soon as you start writing a test, you are declaring the start of a short lived feedback loop for yourself. This feedback loop, guides you as you start your implementation. This is the Red stage of the TDD Red, Green & Refactor cycle. If something is difficult to test, even if you have still not exited the Red stage, you are still getting feedback that there may be something wrong with your design of the thing under test. This is an example as to why many refer to Test Driven Development, not just as a testing strategy but also a software design strategy. If you are struggling, listen to the pain & fix it.

If something is difficult to test, then it will most likely also be difficult to maintain in the future. Often this pain stems from violating things such as the Tell, Don't Ask Principle (which we'll touch on later), the object under test trying to do too much at once or the item under test having too many dependencies which are difficult to mock out.

If a test is failing, but has a descriptive name & readable contents, then it will point you to the source of your problem & reduce the cycle time to turn it green again.

## A web of objects

The book describes object-oriented design as "focusing more on the communication between objects than on the objects themselves".

I think anyone who has built relatively complex software, would agree with this statement. As software grows in complexity & developers optimise for readability (e.g. SRP), the number of classes & dependencies grows. Assuming a class will more than often be a dependency of another class, you end up with what the book describes as a "web of objects" that are all interconnected.

This can sometimes result in classes or instances of those classes, that don't necessarily hold much state, but instead pass data between or interconnect other objects. For example, we may have a service class that has a dependency on a repository class which talks to a database. We verify that a correct call was made by the service class, to the mock repository within our Unit test. This correct call is the communication between objects.

Our service will have a dependency on an IRepository interface. By doing the above, we verify that regardless what repository we use, it will always work with it. The book describes interfaces as being a communication protocol between two types of objects.

By using mocks & verifying communication protocols, it helps us make these communication protocols visible within our tests.

## The Tell Don't Ask principle

There are lots of resources on this principle over the internet, so I don't want to go in to too much detail. But it is brought up within the book.

The way that Freeman & Pryce sum it up in the book is:
"Ask the question we really want answered (from an object/instance of a class), instead of asking for the information to help us figure out the answer ourselves".

The way that I've always tried to adhere to this principle is by trying to avoid having Anemic Domain Models (even where DDD isn't necessarily strictly the goal). This way I naturally most of the time end up with favouring writing methods on objects that hold data, to do the work with that data.

```java
((EditSaveCustomizer) master.getModelisable()
  .getDockablePanel()
    .getCustomizer())
      .getSaveItem().setEnabled(Boolean.FALSE.booleanValue());
```

The book describes not following this principle as resulting in "train wreck" code because our code can often result in a chain of getters on an object versus a single method call.

```java
master.allowSavingOfCustomisations();
```

This for obvious reasons, makes testing of the class that makes the calls to `master` easier as we can mock a single method call. A nice example can be found [here](https://steveliles.github.io/unit_testing_code_written_in_tell_don_t_ask_style.html).

## Tips to write even better tests

Someone, somewhere, once invented a one assertion per test rule. The book disagrees & says this is not always the right thing to do. Multiple assertions are fine.
Someone, somewhere, also once invented a one method per test rule. The book disagrees & says we should be testing behaviors rather than on a method by method basis. Multiple method calls are fine.

Libraries such as JUnit provide ways to define test setup methods or teardown methods. Learn & use these techniques as they will help you increase readability within your test suite.

Use the triple A (Arrange, Act, Assert) or GWT (Given, When, Then) testing patterns within your tests to help separate concerns & (yep, you guessed it) increase readability.

Consider an expressive assertions library such as Fluent Assertions or Shoudly to (yep, again) increase readability.

When complex test suite setups are required due to complex objects, resulting in huge constructors everywhere, consider using the Builder Pattern to build your test objects. It will help reduce code duplication... & (yep, again, again) increase readability.

## Acceptance Test-Driven Development (ATDD) or Double Loop TDD

Unlike within Kent Beck's original book, the GOOS book uses what is known as the Double Loop TDD method or Acceptance TDD. This is where you start off with an Acceptance Test (most likely written using a BDD framework such as cucumber by a stakeholder) to represent the new feature to be built from the outside in, completely black box. The developer then uses regular TDD in smaller iterations - white box regular developer/unit tests - until enough has been done for the Acceptance Test to pass, confirming we have for sure satisfied the user requirement. For example, a single Acceptance Test might spin up an entire API & make a HTTP request then assert on the output. Internally for this to work, there may be numerous moving parts within the system. A controller, a service class, a repository, including dealing with non-happy paths. These require numerous unit/developer tests.

Despite what the GOOS book says about Acceptance Tests however, Ian Cooper talks about whether they actually deliver any added value to developer tests assumign TDD has been done correctly in the first place, including the lack of stakeholder interest in writing & maintaining BDD type tests. So I'll leave it up to you to decide!

## External, Internal Quality & Types of Testing

The book lays out two types of quality which we look to achieve with tests when engineering software, namely both external & internal quality.

External quality refers to whether our software meets the needs of those outside of the development team. Does our software satisfy the needs of our customers/users? Both functionally & non-functionally?

Internal quality refers to how the software meets the needs of those inside of the development team. How maintainable are the code base & tests? Is the code easy to understand & change? What does the average cycle time look like? How often does it wake you up at 3am because of random exceptions?

Most of the time when it comes to quality, development teams tend to neglect internal quality. This is sometimes down to poor development practices & naiveness... sometimes it is because you work somewhere that gives you no time to go after tech debt, the list goes on. As developers I think the best we can take from the book is that we should care about it & think about how the work we're doing that day, affects the internal quality of the software.

In the bigger picture, it should get you thinking about how you can start metricising & proving poor internal quality to the business, in order to get time to address it.

I don't think the book itself mentions Martin Fowler's testing pyramid, however it talks about the importance of finding the right balance between different types of tests. It talks about the risks of testing too finely grained versus the problems of testing too broadly.

It describes unit tests as being the most useful for providing the development team with feedback on internal quality. Which makes sense. We use them when we're refactoring. If they're difficult to write, it tends to mean our code is highly coupled & we have internal problems that need addressing.

On the other hand, end to end tests provide the most feedback on external quality. Cypress UI tests for example, literally mimic your user.

Integration tests lie somewhere in the middle. The book says that they are very useful when testing against code that we don't own & that they should be used to gain confidence that our system integrates across boundaries it has dependencies on. For example, Ian Cooper talks about how the development community over the years has gotten a little bit confused over what an integration test is & isn't. Testing two classes together, isn't an integration test if they're both code that you own. Testing a class that makes a call to a third party API (across a network boundary) or that queries a SQL database (across a network boundary), is an integration test, because you want that test to give you confidence that your code integrates with the thing you don't own.

## The Walking Skeleton

This refers to a barebones application that can be built, tested & deployed in to test & production environments. This obviously also includes things such as appropriate CI/CD tooling all set up to get there. The book talks about starting every new project, with a "walking skeleton".

The book also talks about why "walking skeleton"'s are difficult to do in some businesses that are used to development starting immediately at the start of projects. For example, if a business is used to seeing a certain type of tangible progress (for example, a UI) within the first two sprint reviews of a project running on someone's machine, then they won't be too pleased when you come to them after two sprints with a blank POC application which you think is cool because it's in a real environment, with real pipelines, integrated to real things rather than stubs. The issue here is that 